>> Jafar Husain: Question?
>> Off Camera 1: Will observable fire
when forEach is called no matter if they
are a function that hasn't been called?
>> Jafar Husain: What's that?
>> Off Camera 1: Will observable fire when
forEach is called even if they are in
a function that hasn't been called yet?
>> Jafar Husain: You mean if forEach is
itself nested inside a function and
that hasn't been called yet?
>> Off Camera 1: I believe that is what
they're getting at.
>> Jafar Husain: No.
The point is the forEach
function needs to run, right.
And so if you haven't called
this function yet, right,
then you're not gonna get
that forEach function run.
Now if I call it, then in this
case the forEach function runs.
So that's really just about whether
the forEach function runs or not.
And how we can create all these
objects and have nothing happen
is going to be pretty clear when we take a
look at the implementation of observable.
But I want you to get at least a 5,000
foot idea of what's really going on here.
Let's say I create
a function called print and
it's gonna console log hi,
right?
>> Jafar Husain: I've created
this function.
If I run this now am I
gonna see hi on screen?
Yeah, right, now let's say I create
a function to help me glue other functions
together.
>> Jafar Husain: All it's
gonna do is it's gonna take two functions
and then run them one after the other.
And so I'm now gonna call then,
I'm gonna pass in print, and
then I'm gonna pass in another
function which is gonna log
>> Jafar Husain: I want you to take a look
at this.
>> Jafar Husain: Is any code gonna run?
Am I gonna see hi on the screen?
Am I gonna see hi and
after on the screen now?
What's really going on here?
You know what, I am, actually.
Sorry.
>> Jafar Husain: There's
a lot of functions going on here, right.
But what I'm actually doing is
I'm building a function and
then I'm using another function
to glue it together with another,
with a function that I
want to run afterwards.
But I'm still creating another function.
Look at, with all the stuff,
I haven't actually run any code.
What I mean is, I haven't run the print
code, nor have I run this code.
Because if you look inside of what then's
doing, it's just returning another
function that calls the first function and
the next function.
I know this is confusing code.
But the point I'm trying to call
out is that we're not really
running the code inside of the functions.
We're just creating bigger and bigger
functions by gluing functions together.
Does that make sense?
Kinda?
That's what's really
going on with observable.
Observable's just an object with
a forEach function waiting to be called.
And when we call map, we glue it together
with another function and create another
function, with another object with
a forEach function waiting to be called.
That's what we call laziness.
Instead of doing something,
we create a function,
which can be called later
on to do something.
It's a very lazy way of coding, right, and
it turns out that in programming,
laziness can be a good thing.
Can be a very, very good thing,
cuz it buys us flexibility, right?
A, one of the positives of this is I can
actually run this function now as many
times as I want, right?
Instead of just running the function,
I can create a function that I
can call as many times as I want.
That's what an observable is.
Remember when I said an observable that
represents a network request will issue
a network request again every
single time you call forEach.
That's really at a high level
what we've been doing all along.
Observable isn't so much of an object,
it's really just window dressing around
a single function, which is forEach.
And, we've been combining those forEach
functions together every single time we
call a map and a filter, and creating
another function waiting to be called.
So everything on the top half of this,
it's just doing morally
the equivalent of this.
It's just creating functions.
More and gluing more functions
together to create new functions.
That's why nothing happens
at the top of this code.
Cuz we haven't really run any code
inside of any of the functions.
We've just been gluing a bigger and bigger
function together waiting to be run.
This turns out to be a really
powerful programming technique.
At a high level what we're really doing
is we are passing functions to functions
which create functions.
And that can be confusing but
it's probably self-evident
that that's actually a very high-level and
powerful technique to build a program.
You're at a very high level of coding now.
When you're taking functions,
gluing them together with other functions,
to create more functions.
And so that's one of the reasons
why we're able to write so
little code to do so much.
So that's the level of abstraction
we're working out here.
It's very expert level.
But it doesn't have to be, we don't have
to think of it as all the complexity.
Because we can just look at
these simple five functions,
understand what they do to collections,
and use them again and again.
But there's a lot going on under the hood.
Yes.
Question about what does observable
use under the hood to run reactively?
Well not much, in the sense that
it's just thin window dressing over
the simple asynchronous APIs
that are already in the browser.
So if I make an observable
based on setTimeout,
well when I call forEach, under the hood
it's just gonna call setTimeout.
And then when I call subscription.dispose
it's gonna call clearTimeout using
that handle.
Let's take a look, you know what,
let's take a look at what
an observable looks like.
I wanted to get to this a little later but
just so we don't feel like it's voodoo
going under the hood here, let's take
a look at how I would take set timeout,
which is a browser API which
fires after a few seconds.
And adapt it into an observable, cuz you
can take any push API, any async API
that calls you instead of you calling it,
and you can make it into an observable.
So in the browser you can call,
setTimeout, and
you can pass it a function, and then log
something, and then you give it a time.
And after that time elapses,
it will run your function.
How many people have used this API before?
A few people, yeah?
So it's a useful little API, right?
It also gives you a little handle,
it gives you a handle,
which is a way that you can use.
Let's say after one second,
you decide whoa, the guy closed the form,
he doesn't want that to fire anymore.
Right, I don't want to
show this alert box or
do whatever I was doing,
because now he's closed that form.
He's hit the x button and he's gone away.
Well, in the tradition of having many,
many different async APIs, right?
If you were working with a DOM event,
you would call remove event listener.
But setTimeout is different, right.
It's got actually another weird
clearTimeout, I think it's clearTimeout,
and then you have to pass in this handle,
does that makes sense?
I mean with the DOM even it's got
a different interface, right,
you call it create a handler,
>> Jafar Husain: and
then a dom.addEventListener
>> Jafar Husain: And then
if you wanna remove, it looks like this.
>> Jafar Husain: Notice
both these things are kinda
doing the same thing.
I mean you're registering a callback
to be called at a certain point, right.
You don't necessarily know
when it's gonna get called.
And hen if you want to stop receiving any
information, if you wanna cancel that,
you call this API.
Here with the DOM event it's kind of the
same thing, you're giving somebody else
a callback, somebody's calling you
instead of you calling them, right.
And then later on if you decide you wanna
cancel, it's a totally different API, but
they're both doing the exact same thing.
It's this kind of complexity that
really doesn't need to exist.
We can have just one API for
dealing with all push data sources,
where somebody is pushing information to
you, and that's what an observable is.
So let's say I want to take this
setTimeout API which is just an arbitrary
design of how a push API should work, and
I'm gonna convert it into an observable.
So it looks the same as all
the other observable APIs.
So I'm gonna use, now remember I told
you an observable is nothing but
an object with a forEach method,
and I didn't lie.
That's all it is,
it's an object with a forEach method.
And it accepts an observer object.
Now I want to take a little moment to
remind you what an observer object.
An observer object is a method,
is an object with three functions.
>> Jafar Husain: That's all
an observer is.
Remember when you
subscribe to an observable,
it's a lot like subscribing to an event
but giving three callbacks instead of one.
Does anybody remember why we
have those two extra callbacks?
What do they represent, what are they for?
>> Off Camera 2: Terms of
completion.
>> Jafar Husain: Yeah.
They're for completing observable
contract with those two extra semantics
that were left out of
iterator all those years ago.
We want the producer to be able to
push a message to the consumer,
not just be able to give them data,
which is what onNext is for.
We also want a well defined way for
the producer to say to the consumer,
no more data is arriving,
or an error occurred.
So that's what those
two callbacks are for.
So when you forEach over an observable,
like I did down here.
>> Jafar Husain: This
is actually just a short hand.
>> Jafar Husain: This is actually just
a shorthand for this.
>> Jafar Husain: So
it's just a shorthand for
only providing an onNext handler.
That's all you're doing, you're creating,
it's a shorthand,
it creates the observer object for you.
Does that makes sense?
So whenever you implement an observable,
you expect that forEach will
accept an observer object.
Cuz RX, the underlying library,
takes any possible overload of forEach and
it basically converts all of
those into observer objects.
You only have to worry about, you don't
have to worry about all the different
possible overloads cuz I can also
>> Jafar Husain: We covered this in
the presentation yesterday but
it's been awhile so let's cover it again.
So, you can pass in onNext and
then onError.
You can pass in three callbacks.
>> Jafar Husain: Function
with no arguments which is onCompleted.
And that will just get converted into
>> Jafar Husain: An observer object.
>> Jafar Husain: Does that makes sense?
So the first argument is onNext.
The second argument onError.
And the last argument onCompleted.
Or you can pass in an object with three
named functions, onNext, onError,
and onCompleted.
It's totally up to you,
either one of these will work.
However when we're writing
observables ourselves,
we can count on the RX library of
always converting into this form.
So we'll always get an observer
object with those three properties.
So under the hood RX takes this and
converts it into this before passing
the observer to an observable.
Does that make sense?
So it's got a little sugar where it
just converts from one form to another.
So when I write an observable,
I can be sure that this observer
object is in this form.